The need for financing, we return to the sphere of our planning, directly to the planning processes,
shows a table of money flows.
This is negative net cash flow per saldo of investment and operational activities,
so to speak, negative saldo of the real sphere.
In order to cover these deficits and use certain sources of financing,
it is necessary to take into account certain components.
Please look at the slide, they are listed.
First, the presence and size of your own capital,
how much of your own money we can invest in the creation of an enterprise or its development.
On the other hand, the availability of credit financing,
is there an opportunity to get loans.
The conditions for lending arise, how much does it cost,
what kind of insurance is required for a loan,
do we have such an insurance.
The target parameter is the maximization of income for the shareholder on capital,
that is, the financial manager calculates the profitability of his own capital,
the action of the financial lever.
Financial investors are always interested in the moment of leaving the business,
how easy it is to leave the business,
at what stage can this company be sold,
at what stage of development this company,
for what price, will there be buyers.
It is always very interesting to provide flexibility in financing.
In any case, if we plan our sources of financing,
taking into account all these realities,
we must provide some kind of reserve,
if something goes wrong, as we planned,
it will be possible to change something.
For this, of course, money is needed.
The next rule is that banks are the institutions where you will be given money
when you do not need it.
Banks are willing to lend to companies that have enough money.
All these financing solutions form the target structure and the average capital price.
The contract planning of the table of money flows
is a very convenient tool for modeling sources of financing.
Here we see three standard options.
Payment of a single amount at the end of the lending period,
payment of equal amounts every year for 250 units,
and the third option is an annuity of payments with equal contributions.
For us, these orders and financing schedules are not indifferent.
We need to choose the one that is convenient for us.
Convenient from the point of view of money flows.
We refer to our table of money flows and look at how,
depending on how we expect the proceeds to come to us,
how we will pay,
what money flows we will generate in order to pay off the loan.
And accordingly, we choose any of these options,
the loan repayment schedule,
we agree with the lender and conclude our special schedule,
including, for example, the interest rate,
not from the first period, but after several periods.
This is especially important for large projects,
for investment projects, for projects in the creation of enterprises.
How can an enterprise that has been created today,
which will be built in 2-5 years,
start to pay off a loan today?
This is unrealistic.
Therefore, all these are possible options,
flexibility in financing and financing realities,
what we have, what opportunities we have today in the financial market.
In general, academically, and in life, this rule is very important,
whether to take a loan or not.
This strategic decision that top managers make
is related to the actions of the financial lever.
I have already mentioned this several times.
You know that the financial lever describes the profitability of its own capital.
It is associated with the model of profitability of its own capital,
which shows the dependence of the profitability of its own capital
on the profitability of assets and financial stability.
Please see, here we have nothing but the coefficient of financial autonomy.
And the financial lever, which talks about the possibilities of financing,
about the risks of financing, is involved in this model of profitability.
The goal of lending, the goal of activity in general,
is to increase the profitability of shareholders,
to increase the return on shareholder capital.
It can be achieved by a risky action,
risky from the point of view of financial stability,
by the decision to take an additional loan.
And this decision will be justified if our interest rate on the loan
exceeds the already achieved profitability of assets.
In this case, financial stability changes,
the share of its own capital is reduced,
the simplest setting, the simplest numbers can be seen.
And then we get the growth of the profitability of our own capital.
I will ask you to see the examples in the conspect, in the workbook,
to see the examples of calculations and modeling of loan calculations,
and to remember the actions of the financial lever,
the actions of the profitability model.
I ask you to analyze these tasks
and try to apply them to your reality,
to the activities of your companies,
and use them in your practice.
Our main goal is to help solve problems in business.
We analyze very popularly, very simply.
I try to give you such basics of financial planning,
because we have programs, complexes for financial planning, automation.
Of course, no one does anything by hand,
but in order to use all these tools correctly,
you need to understand what you want,
what are the final strategic parameters we want to get.
We always remember profitability and risk,
about two components.
Please, our profitability and risk of financial stability.
A little tour back to the topic that you have already passed in financial management,
the financial lever.
Thus, we use all the principles of financing,
all the rules of financing,
plus the availability of financial tools.
We have our reality,
whether we can or want to give us loans.
We choose a convenient financing scheme
suitable for our company from the point of view of expected inflows and outflows of funds.
What do we want to get from this financing?
We have achieved the strategic goal.
These issues are solved in the process of routine planning.
We choose a convenient, I emphasize, scheme of financing,
not an optimal one.
We leave the concept of optimal financing to the theorists.
However, if you want to receive the Nobel Prize,
this is exactly the area where I wish you success.
Financial flow
Now, after we have planned the money flows,
we move on to other documents of the financial plan.
You have already been asked in Paravia about money flows,
cash flow, and what's next.
Money flows are the basis of financial planning,
but in addition to the fact that we make up the money flows,
we also make up the plan balances and the profit plan.
These documents are necessary in order to transfer information,
to exchange information from one form to another.
It is impossible to make up a plan of money flows without a profit plan.
In addition, then, according to the entire set of financial documents,
we can calculate the financial coefficients
corresponding to our strategic goals,
analyze the parameters of profitability and risk
according to the planned and predicted data,
and, if necessary, make changes,
review the planned task,
and then we can extend all our stages of planning,
solutions for all stages of planning,
according to the set strategic parameters,
according to the tactically established standards.
So, we are planning the company balance.
The balance plan is also a table,
a strategic plan, a forecast balance,
which is also a table, different from the accounting form of the balance,
that is, the positions in the balance are all the same,
but the balances are also made up for the entire horizon of planning,
by year, as a rule, by the end of the year,
every planned year, we set out what positions we will have in the balance,
and we will make decisions about investments and financing.
So, in this forecast balance, we will have information
about where the funds came from,
the sources of financing, passives,
how they were used,
look at the slide, the balance scheme,
the asset on the left, the passive on the right,
and in the process of planning, it will be more convenient for us to use the passive for the asset.
So, you see, the logical scheme, what is the balance,
in passives, the sources of financing,
in assets, how they were used, investments,
the passive shows what funds are invested,
what capital is invested,
the asset shows what property the enterprise has,
what other obligations should be in passives,
what is credited to the owners in passives,
their own capital,
we see that we have two components of one whole,
financing and investment.
We see that these are two components of one whole,
There is no investment without financing,
and financing without investment.
Here is our balance,
and two sides are equal in balance,
with equal balance,
with equal amount in the end.
The asset structure,
how do we get the asset structure in the balance,
we transfer all our strategic investment decisions here.
If we buy equipment,
we get the main funds in the balance.
If we use leasing,
we use leasing,
accordingly, our investments are not reflected.
Leasing is already a current aspect of activity,
payments on leasing are reflected in the profit plan,
in the cost, in the second form of accounting.
That is, the assets in the balance are connected with the investment plan,
and with the section of investment activity,
the table of money flows.
The balance assets are built in accordance with the decisions made on financing.
What funds do we use?
Our own capital,
in the form of initial investments,
in the form of fixed capital,
in the form of accumulated profits in the process of activity,
or in the form of borrowed capital,
which we use.
As the enterprise develops,
in addition to external sources,
internal sources are reflected in the enterprise balance,
for example, accumulated profits,
the capital itself increases.
If the enterprise works with losses,
the capital itself is exhausted.
This is an extremely unfavorable situation.
We can use such a balance to calculate financial coefficients.
But not quite in this form,
it is better to use a converted balance.
Financial coefficients are assumed to be a conversion of the balance.
How?
From the passives, the credit debt is transferred to the assets with a minus sign.
As if we said that the credit debt covers our need for turnover capital.
And the turnover assets with the deduction of the credit debt
form a pure turnover capital of the enterprise.
And it is in this form,
as you have on the slide,
an analytical balance,
it shows exactly this balance,
what funds the enterprise has invested in assets,
what capital was used,
and what property the enterprise has.
Here is the balance.
Where and how is the balance presented?
And, of course, you already know the financing rules.
We can control the balance
by comparing the capital itself with non-turnover assets.
The gold financing rule.
Capital itself with borrowed capital.
Horizontally and vertically.
We check the financial stability.
The profit plan.
The most important document.
The profitability of the enterprise was and remains
the most important parameter of the efficiency of the enterprise.
The profit plan includes both the income and the expense positions.
It reflects the current results of the enterprise.
The profit plan is usually made
when the enterprise is created only after the start of the production process.
This reflects the income,
the income from other types of activities,
and the corresponding current costs, costs, expenses.
In order to make up the profit plan,
we use production plans,
marketing plans,
and the corresponding budgetary costs.
We do not consider the budgetary technique within our course.
It is a separate subject, a separate course.
But, of course, there is no financial planning without budgets.
I will ask you to look at the table in detail
how the income and expenses of the enterprise are formed.
It is an expanded table that I have compiled for you in the textbook.
Another interesting point that can be touched upon is our modernity.
How do we plan the revenue?
How do we predict the revenue?
First of all, the growth of the revenue is one of the most important goals of many companies.
A company can set an annual revenue growth of 10%, for example,
or set a goal to achieve a certain revenue in 3 years, 5 years, or more.
To predict the revenue,
you can use a very interesting model of achievable growth.
It is shown on the slide.
The model is quite complex.
You can understand how it works by analyzing the example,
which is provided in the textbook.
This model is derived.
You can trust this model.
It shows how to develop,
how to achieve revenue with certain parameters.
Moreover, you can use any target parameters in this model,
such as a certain profitability,
the turnover of assets,
or a target capital structure in relation to your own and borrowed funds.
The model is very interesting.
Calculations are not difficult.
You can use the electronic tables to see the calculations.
The model is used.
The revenue is calculated.
If the planned revenue calculated by this model is not enough,
does not meet our desires, ambitions, and the accepted strategy,
we must correct the bias,
sacrifice, for example, financial stability,
and increase the share of borrowed capital.
The plan of revenue is a tax instrument.
We determine what taxes we will pay.
The payment of taxes goes from the plan of revenue to the plan of cash flows,
as the position of the flow of payment.
The plan of revenue involves a certain optimization of tax payments.
Financial managers, taking advantage of the accounting policy,
adopt a certain accounting policy,
which is profitable and purposeful at the moment,
use a rich arsenal of revenue maneuvering.
I recommend you to read the books and chapters of Professor Kovalyov
on the issue of revenue management.
It is a very interesting topic of research.
The qualification of a financial manager is related to the possibility of tax payments optimization.
We have already mentioned this.
This includes accelerated monetization, revaluation of the main funds,
the use of leasing, the use of certain accounting methods,
interest rates for credit writing costs, and so on.
It is very interesting and very useful.
Of course, we all do not like to pay taxes,
but we must, because we carry out our activities under the protection of the state,
and the state receives its share of our income from us for this.
Another interesting point that we must take into account,
and I want to draw your attention to, in the framework of the PLAN,
is, of course, the calculation of cost.
Budgeting, budget technology is a separate topic,
but we must take into account the following essential things.
We must remember that we have variable and conditional costs in our expenses.
As soon as we forget about this, we will have distortions,
we will have troubles, we will have a bad planning.
Why?
It is not easy to divide variable and conditional costs by their accounting.
If I ask a student, they will tell me right away,
good students, that variable costs are the main salary,
the main material is the paid salary,
and the conditional costs are rent, amortization.
Yes, it is true.
There are some articles on the current costs that can be attributed to variable and conditional costs,
but we still use the word conditional and conditional more often.
And just to scrupulously divide these costs,
this is variable, this is conditional,
in principle, this is not the main goal.
We need to remember the trends.
We need to understand that the higher the constant costs,
the greater the risk of being in excess.
We remember the actions of the operating lever,
so we must clearly measure our ambitions,
for example, to rent an office in the center of Moscow with the appropriate rent,
and for this we must provide the appropriate turnover,
consulting and the appropriate volume of services provided.
If we forget about constant costs,
if we do not clarify in the planning process,
and even more precisely, if we do not make an element of the analysis of profitability
at the end of the plan,
and such a line as the determination of the profitable volume of sales
and the reserve of financial strength as an assessment of the risk,
we can get into a bad situation,
be in losses when our revenue,
our marginal income,
the revenue will not cover the costs,
and even if the revenue covers the costs,
then, perhaps, the marginal income will not cover our variable costs.
Again, I remind you of the two components, profitability and risk.
Very roughly and in a large way,
in the planning, of course, in terms of the profit in terms of the lines,
when we have a cost, including constant variable costs,
we provide variable costs that change proportionally in terms of revenue.
These variable costs must be justified,
they must have the appropriate standards,
and these standards can be introduced according to the accounting.
The scrupulous planning offers a scrupulous calculation of all the components of variable costs
and the standards of variable costs for the specific indicator,
for the ruble, for the piece, for the ton.
The universal meter is, of course, the variable costs in the calculation for the ruble of revenue.
Current costs are constant variable,
this is a fundamental point.
In addition, there is a very common case
when the current costs and capital costs are mixed.
We are talking about the core moments of profit planning.
Profit is the second part of the balance sheet,
the second form of accounting,
it is associated with the current results of activities.
Only the current costs are reflected in the corresponding costs.
All capital costs, all uniform costs,
they affect the positions of the balance sheet.
What example can be given of a mixture?
A new company is created,
and before the start of the operating processes,
at the moment of the creation of the enterprise,
registration of the enterprise,
there are expenses that seem to be current expenses,
the salary of the accountant.
But in fact, these expenses before the start of the production process
cannot be written off for revenue,
so they are the position of the balance sheet.
Such expenses that seem to be current,
in fact, are capital,
they must be carried out by the corresponding accounting procedures
and reflected in the balance sheet as expenses for the future,
as organizational expenses.
Otherwise, it turns out that there is no revenue,
there are current expenses,
which means that losses are formed in the enterprise,
these losses increase,
they then go into the balance sheet of the enterprise,
they exhaust their own capital,
the net assets of the enterprise are negative,
and with such a balance sheet,
you do not have to count on a loan.
I would like to draw your attention to the division of the concepts
of the results and expenses,
inflows and outflows of funds.
Today we have touched on these concepts in one way or another.
And once again,
we summarize the results and expenses in terms of profit,
inflows and outflows in cash flows.
There is no coarser mistake in economic judgments,
as the academician Novozhilov once said,
than in the mixture of income and expense,
with the result and expenses.
This also happens.
But we have already given examples many times.
Why does the difference between the concept of profit and cash flow arise?
Because we have the results of activity,
for example, revenue,
which is not always an inflow of funds
to the force of the formation of the debtor's debt.
As part of the expenses,
we have a wonderful article
called amortization calculations,
which does not mean outflows.
It is not paid out in the current period.
Amortization calculations accumulate
and affect the financial result.
So, we have considered,
touched on the basics of planning cash flows,
liquidity tables, cash flow,
planned balances,
profit plans.
All these tables are interconnected.
They are made in parallel,
and a separate position goes from one document
to another document,
and is corrected.
For example, we determine the possibility of a loan
by the flow of money.
Finances of loans
affect the position of the balance.
In the profit plan,
after determining the order of financing,
we correct the cost for interest payments.
And, in turn,
calculating the tax on the profit,
we use a new position,
and transfer this position to the cash flow plan.
Only after making a profit
in the cash flow plan
we get a table of tax payments.
Here is a simple example.
This is a professor Zelia,
my teacher.
This is a professor of the University of Bremen.
A simple example of the creation of an enterprise.
We can see the relationship
between finance and accounting.
Let's say,
in the first year we created an enterprise
and invested our own capital.
Here we see the investment of our own capital
in the balance.
We have this money on the account,
in the assets, in the passives,
as a fixed capital.
And it is reflected as a flow of funds
in terms of liquidity.
The net cash flow is plus 40.
In the next year,
in the next period,
we buy machines and equipment
for the money we have
and create a reserve of return funds.
You can see the change in the balance position
and the change in the position of the inflows and outflows.
In terms of liquidity,
negative saldo is formed,
negative net cash flow,
which means a decrease in the money
on the account.
Look, 0 was 40,
net cash flow minus 40,
it became 0.
We have specially stretched it a little
for clarity.
Yes, usually these processes are parallel,
especially when we talk about an operating enterprise.
It is just more convenient to look at these points
to create an enterprise.
And finally, in the third period,
we start the process of manufacturing goods,
selling goods,
and, accordingly,
the positions of the profit plan appear.
Profit is formed,
tax is formed,
inflows and outflows of funds are changed.
I would like to draw your attention to the outflows of funds.
We reflect the cost of the amortization payments.
In the profit plan,
we have the total cost of 53 units.
In the balance,
we also have new positions,
the profit tax of this period.
Here, while reflected as a budget calculation,
the profit tax will be paid in the next period.
And the next year,
we continue the production process,
taxes are paid,
revenue from the implementation as an outflow of funds is received.
We pay for our current use of resources.
And since we planned everything well,
everything is correct,
we are constantly increasing the currency balance.
We are getting richer.
Thus, we have considered all the processes and documents
of long-term financial planning.
How to make a profit plan,
how to make a profit plan,
how to make balances.
According to these documents,
the leaders of the upper and middle links
can assess
how the company will generate a pure money flow,
what needs will appear in investments
and external financing,
and when it will appear,
at what time.
Then we will be able to assess the possibility
and terms of payment of interest,
repayment of debt.
We can monitor the change in the balance value of property
according to the predicted balance,
how the structure of capital will change.
We will definitely take measures
to optimize tax payments,
we will plan the payment of dividends.
And in the end,
we will predict and calculate the financial state,
assess profitability and risk of activity
in standard indicators.
We will now consider the specifics
of short-term planning.
It consists of assessing the current needs
in financial funds
and determining short-term sources of financing.
Please look at the slide.
From the previous table of financial sources,
short-term sources,
external and internal sources,
are highlighted.
External sources of financing
are loans and loans,
and debt to suppliers and contractors,
credit debt.
Internal sources are debt on taxes and fees,
and loans on fees,
invoices, and interest.
Short-term sources of financing
are also overdrafts,
commodity loans.
The definition of the current needs
in short-term financial funds
is carried out
using a special table of money flows
called the cash flow plan.
We emphasize that this is a short-term plan.
It is a short-term plan
that is not a cash flow plan,
but a short-term plan.
The cash flow plan is a short-term plan
that is not a cash flow plan.
Please look at the slide.
The main contents of the cash flow plan
are presented.
The cash flow plan includes
sales receipts,
operating payments,
payment of supplies,
and all this
is short-term.
The cash flow plan is a short-term plan
that is not a cash flow plan.
Now let's look at
the routine planning processes
of the business.
Again,
we have a simplified example.
We have the accounting data
for December.
The next slide, please.
We have a sales receipts forecast
for January, February, and March.
We can see
what is planned for us.
The revenue from the implementation
is planned to be sold
at 250, 200,
and 250 units per month.
at 250, 200, and 250 units per month.
Moreover,
we let go of the vast majority
of goods on credit.
We receive only a small amount of goods,
10%,
at the moment.
You can see
how we have the
revenue plan ratio,
the revenue plan ratio,
the implementation plan,
and the sales receipts plan.
The December implementation
in the amount of
350 cash units
is due in January.
And only 25 units,
10% of 250,
we receive
in this period.
Next,
we have to plan
the sales receipts plan
in accordance with the planned
sales receipts.
The sales receipts are calculated
for our revenue,
for our sales volume
in the amount of
80, 100, and 140 cash units.
All sales receipts
are implemented
with a payment period
of a month.
We pay for the sales receipts
in December in January,
in January in February,
in February in March.
These inconsistencies
in the payment and
the payment and the payment
receipts, we have planned
in the long-term plan
within the framework of the
turnover capital calculation,
very largely.
Here, when we make
the cash receipts,
we plan in this way.
You can see the final cash receipts plan
on this slide.
Here, the balance of cash
receipts,
receipts and payments,
and the balance of receipts
and payments increases
the balance of cash receipts
at the end of the period.
We planned more or less successfully here,
we have no problems.
But if the cash receipts plan shows
a deficit of cash,
then it is necessary to provide
short-term financing.
This is due to additional
interest payments.
As an alternative,
you can use the cash receipts plan
to put things in order
and provide some transfers
between receipts and payments.
The cash receipts plan allows
to predict the moment
when we will have a short-term
financing and choose the optimal
way to meet this need.
And if we have
super-normal cash receipts,
we must
within the framework of
management and optimization of
these receipts, put the free
and super-normal
receipts into liquid value
securities.
But since we work in a very
uncertain structure,
when we can always make some
changes,
we have a special function
of planning,
a sign of planning,
adaptability of planning.
We must flexibly
anticipate all these changes.
When we have planned
some parameters,
indicators,
we must always keep in mind
that there will be a need
to review them.
Flexibility of planning,
adaptability of planning
and the possibility of
making adjustments.
It is very convenient
to use electronic tables
for this.
It is cheap, fast
to review the entire planning process,
to put everything in order,
to review the planned task,
to see what we have in the end
and to form an optimal
plan that satisfies
both the owners and managers.
A plan
that will not
cause doubts
when creditors need it.
Today we have covered
the conceptual basis, essence
and features of financial planning.
In the first chapter
we have identified the target parameters
of planning,
learned to divide long-term
and short-term planning,
strategy and tactics of the company.
We have considered the processes
of forecasting of money flows
as a basis for ensuring
financial balance.
This is the subject of the current planning.
We have considered
the main methods of managing
the company to optimize
the tax payments.
We have considered
the methods of forecasting
the needs in investments,
the sources of financing.
We remember the rules
of financing,
we remember the risk that lies
behind making every decision
about investments and financing.
Then we have touched
on short-term planning.
We have considered the technique
of cash flow planning,
the necessary technique,
the useful one,
which we can use every day.
Thus, we have highlighted
and, in general,
we have implemented
the problem of financial planning
as a necessity of the current
and operational monitoring of plans
to optimize the financial cycle.